He is the father of triple digit deficits.
Do you think you will go down in history as such?
It looks to me at the moment like I probably will, because they weren't corrected.
We've had triple digit deficits.
This will be the fifth year in a row.
And even if Congress makes some modest little adjustments like they were talking about for next year, it's still going to be at minimum 150, maybe 200 when all is said and done.
So it doesn't look very good.
I guess I'm looking for more of a
Well, I don't know how that I can wiggle out of it.
I think the book demonstrates that the original plan was flawed.
It was too optimistic on its economic assumptions.
It was too ambitious in terms of trying to pier three or four years in the future, put a big tax reduction into place permanently, assume that the Senate and reductions were being made and would be made.
And that sort of just radically unhinged the system.
by August 1981.
Now, I did spend four years in the trenches trying to get it corrected in any way I could, begging, pleading, even sort of bringing people along one way or another.
And we did correct a little bit of the problem.
Some people don't realize we did raise taxes four times after that.
It wasn't because the supply siders were telling the president to do it, it was because Jim Bacon and I were.
And it wasn't because the Republican partisans in the counties were telling the president to do it.
They opposed it.
It was just the solid middle leadership of Democrats and Republicans who kind of overpowered the White House and in the end confronted the president with a fade account lead.
Now, that has reduced the deficit substantially, those four tax increases, by $100 billion a year compared to where we end up in the summer of 1981, way off the track.
The fence has been scaled way back, too.
Again, Congress just lowered the boom and said, sorry, Mr. President, sorry, Cap, you're not going to get that money and you can't afford it.
I spent four years helping that to happen, so it could have been a lot worse.
It's hard to imagine it could have been a lot worse, but if anybody does a careful counting of the numbers, then you will see that this coming year we
So I think I accomplished something by staying on.
But the result is still not very tolerable.
You say that in about November, if I could give a specific date, November 12th, I think.
That's when the— Yeah, that's right.
He said, you know, it was doomed to fail.
Yeah, why—I mean, why then stay on for five years?
Well, because I've just described it.
For the next four years, we whittled away at this damn thing and substantially reduced
what otherwise would have been truly catastrophic deficits.
Right, but wasn't this more or less a case of shoveling, you know, what against the tides?
Yeah, but it made a difference.
I mean, you don't like to get into numbers, but the fact is, in 1987, federal revenues will be $100 billion higher than if we had done nothing from November 12, 1981 on.
That didn't happen by immaculate conception.
The president dug in his heels and was opposed to it every step away, but we finally
by one way or another got him to sign those bills.
Nobody in the Congress wanted to do it among the partisans, but there were responsible people, like Danny Rostenkowski and Bob Dole and even Tip O'Neill.
When push came to shove, he didn't have to rescue the president's chestnuts, but he supplied the Democratic majorities to pass these tax bills, and the president has never even recognized it.
He's still beaten up on Congress day after day.
when he had produced a catastrophe and didn't know it, and then the Congress rescued working with people like myself and Baker in the administration.
At least mitigated the disaster that had occurred.
That's why it stayed for four years, and I didn't write a lot about that in the book, because I figured, one, people understood that it happened, and second, I wanted to explain what happened in 1981 that caused
well-intended, high-minded, idealistic plan to turn into a total mishap.
Were you naive, do you think?
No, I don't think so, because I spent four years in Congress, and I knew they were against spending cuts, and I also knew they were against tax cuts.
And I didn't think Congress would ever uncork this massive tax reduction if we hadn't cut spending.
But I mean, you entered in certainly with the conviction that
this grand scheme.
It was a good idea.
I don't think the grand scheme had any fatal flaw on paper.
Well, when did it screw up?
It screwed up in the implementation, and the book documents that.
How could it have succeeded, or was it doomed to failure from the outset?
Well, probably in a practical political sense it was doomed to failure, but again, there's some subtlety here that nobody wants to grapple with.
I just want to make sure it works.
Go ahead.
In the spring of 1981, after the plan had been launched, but before any votes had been taken, and in the end, Congress writes the spending laws and writes the tax laws.
Anybody's paper plan can be thrown in the trash can in about two days.
But after we got that paper plan up there, the consensus was the tax cut was going nowhere.
People were afraid of it.
They thought it was too big, too risky.
And it was only the apparent success in cutting spending in the first two months that sort of changed the traffic light from red to green that sent Congress and all of us into this orgy of tax cutting in July.
And as I document my book, in the out years, the tax cut turned out to be almost twice as large as we intended.
And in the out years, once you've
pierced through all of this fog.
The spending cut turned out to be only one-third of the size that we intended.
And so, when you double the revenue loss and you reduce the spending savings by two-thirds, of course the whole thing sort of splits apart at the seams radically.
Now, you could say, well, why didn't you understand it at the time?
Well, the answer was nobody really looked four or five, six years into the future in those days, because in those days we worked on one or two year budgets.
But, I mean, this whole scheme, though, was looking not just five years into the future.
I think it was looking into the future.
No, it did look five years into the future.
I mean, it was really looking—it was changing the whole scope of— Yeah, I know.
But in terms of translating it into the numbers, which is where it fell apart,
We project it as outsiders in the future, but, you know, the political process can't deal with 250 numbers.
Now, the title of your book is almost an ironic title, The Triumph of Politics.
But, I guess.
Well, what it means is the triumph of politics over doctrine.
Obviously.
But doesn't, I hate to bring up the word naïve again, but doesn't politics
inevitably triumph in the political system.
But politics triumph in an unsatisfactory and ironic way.
The politicians went ahead and did something against their better judgment, adopted a huge tax cut on the one hand, and continued to perform sort of the defensive protection, turf-minded
approach on the spending side.
Now, if they would have been recalcitrant on both questions, as they said they were at the beginning, no great damage would have been done, because the tax cut never would have gotten adopted.
I think the great mystery of 1981 is how long had Congress lost its census and the administration and passed this giant tax cut in July 1981.
People were voting for things they couldn't live with.
Did you read Russell Baker this morning?
No.
Interesting.
Do read it.
I mean it's an interesting book, an interesting piece on your book.
But he quotes someone who describes your book, I forget the person, but it's a cute quote, as a feel-bad book in a feel-good era.
Can you respond to that?
Well, yeah, I mean— Is it a feel-bad book?
Is this a good—a feel-good— I suppose it's a feel-bad book, because it's a very idealistic plan turned to dust.
I suppose it's a feel-bad book— I mean, a feel-bad specifically on your part.
Yeah, because I— I mean, he also suggests sour grapes, too.
Well, I don't think it's sour grapes.
I mean, when you create a trillion dollars' worth of debt, double it in five years, unless you think that there's some shoebox out there that we're funding all that out of,
I think it's a very good thing.
When you leave the finances, the United States government is drastically out of balance.
If the government is stalemated, paralyzed, you can't even make any decisions.
I don't think that's such a good thing.
When you have gotten by, by financing all that deficit to import and foreign capital, which isn't sustainable and you can't do that for the next ten or twenty years,
and which has produced enormous distortions in the economy in terms of trade flows, jobs lost, industry investments, and so forth.
You can't say that's a good thing.
Now, for the moment the oil price collapsed in the stock and bond market took a little temporary comfort out of it, and that's supposed to be feel-good.
Well, that isn't very stable for the long run.
I don't think there are very many serious economists who think that it's going to have smooth sailing for the next five years.
I think there are a lot of people who believe in the short run.
So what are we looking at, in your view?
I think we're looking at some rather insuperable choices.
We can't live with this trade deficit, so we want to get the dollar down.
But we can't get the dollar down radically because we need to attract foreign capital to finance the current deficit.
And as time goes on, that noose will get tighter and tighter.
And we sort of bob back and forth between one objective and the other, but the two are inconsistent.
And so sooner or later you're going to grind the economy to a halt in terms of growth if you keep the dollar high, or you are going to unleash a new inflationary wave if you radically depreciate the dollar in order to improve the trade.
Is this book a confessional?
Well, yeah, I think it's not confessional and just individual.
this book? Uh well not really it was sort of uh, I lived through it every day. I probably had a better grasp on what was happening than anybody else. Um all these ships passing in the night, all these miscommunications all these rationalizations all of this partisanship all this sloganeering, the papers over the reality so I thought it needed to be explained. Is there anything, I mean you certainly have you don't have to go into the the descriptions and characterizations because they're in the book? But you certainly have some things to say about the fellas?
Yeah, because some of these guys stuck their head in the van for four years, I can see.
But could we describe it as a settling scores type thing?
No, it's just that I had a rather impossible thing to explain.
Now for the moment everybody thinks, well, don't worry about the death that's behind me.
That's crazy.
I mean this thing will be back within months.
But I had to explain how a plan that was going to get a balanced budget produced the most staggering.
Do you feel like a Cassandra, perhaps?
Well, I didn't intend to take on that role, but, you know, some people have given it to me, so.
Is that right?
Well, I mean, that's how it's been labeled, but the point is, I had to explain something, which is,
you know, if you look at it objectively, a pretty devastating outcome.
So why did it happen?
Why did we stick with it?
Why didn't we see that we were off track in September, November 1981, when I clearly told everybody we were, and fix it?
Well, the answer was, for four years, people like me, people like Don Regan, simply kept a process of reality denial going.
It was rather incredible and irresponsible.
And I think history some day, if they don't like my charges, we document that.
Your resume points out that you were the youngest person in this century, I guess, to hold a cabinet level position.
Do you think maybe you were too young?
Yeah, I think that's a fair criticism.
But the point is… But along with the two years perhaps being a little bit realistic.
Sure.
Somebody who's been through the wars for ten years is going to be awful cautious about how far they push a new direction in policy, a big change in policy, because they have a better feel for
how this political system is likely to kick up appeals and respond back.
So I don't think any 34-year-olds, whether it's left-wing or right-wing, are necessarily safely put in with your politics.
You describe, you get some nice feel, some nice scenes with this group, the LSG, and that's where you put your little calculator on there.
No, I thought so for a little while, but then after I went through these miserable battles from September 1981 to August 1985, the losses of Lourdes.
I mean, Henry Kissinger is described as an Ephrodisiac.
Well, it may be if things are working right.
But when you were struggling from, again, and I got to establish the record, and the book shows from September 1981, I was just
Yeah, but I was constantly hitting brick walls, trying to get them to face up to this genie that's been a lot out of the box.
And that wasn't all that exciting.
Yeah, but you were the heavy, you were the tough guy going up to
Yeah, but that's a, you know, in a way that's kind of a distorted recollection.
After 1981, I did that in 81 when we launched, but after it was clear by September, this whole plan was off course.
Basically, I was a beggar with a teen cop up on the hill a whole couple of times I hauled off an earring.
I mean, you pissed off, pardon me, the farm-raising.
Yeah, but you know, that happened in two instances.
You know, that's about two minutes' worth of tea.
But that's what the public remembers.
But you point out, you know, the focused nature of TV news, I mean.
That is nearly a media image.
What I was doing day after day for years, going up there, hat in hand, behind closed doors,
in the back door pleading with some of the more responsible people that helped me get.
And it wasn't, you know, some kind of charge of the light brigade.
It was just a fairly miserable process of trying to re-formulate the majority that had been
Decimation.
Being out, is it relief, frustration, bitterness, all of these, some of these?
No, I mean, it's basically relief.
In one word.
Yeah.
I mean, you can only take that if it's so long.
And you're finally saying, oh, it's enough.
How about bitterness?
No.
No, not really.
I don't feel you were treated shabbily by some of these.
Oh, I think for a couple people, sure.
Beaver.
But on the whole, I think it was very accurate.
Everyone certainly wants to get the idea, and you certainly call the fellas illiterate when it comes to reading, not just reading books.
But by reading I didn't mean it.
I mean, having meant idea-based.
But you also say that they don't read books.
But they do have a tube mentality, let's put it that way.
Yeah, those are metaphors.
You can read it after all the allegations.
No, I don't think we have the allegations, but the little snippets came out.
What's my question?
What is my question?
Where were we going on that, do you remember?
Well, yeah, that's what my attitude was coming out of it.
Yeah, there are a couple of sore points, but you know, I'm not mad at Chuck O'Neill, I'm not mad at most of the leaders in Congress.
I guess I'm trying to back into your assessment of the intellectual acumen, as everyone is asking, who is a president or a dull-witted person, and the people about him, or they're dull-witted people, so you can use any adjective you want.
One gets the feel here that we're dealing with people who have a very shallow, transparent grasp on
I mean, we seem to go on image.
Yeah, I think that's right.
I mean, it's mostly slogans and cliches and, you know, how can you go on giving speeches about this big government monster six years later, when over the last six years you've come to the conclusion in deed, if not in word, that you don't have much of an argument with?
You know, I don't know.
I'm more of an intellectual type, so if I come up with a generalization, such as, you know, Washington is a, I don't know, what other words are used?
Well, I can't remember.
But that this government is way too big and it's overspending and all that to cause this problem.
You know, I like to feel there's a little bit of factual documentation for that that is relevant to the size of the charge.
But look at this trillion-dollar budget, debt service, defense, social security, farmers, veterans, and a couple other things, none of which the president wants to cut.
Now, so therefore, how can you say the government's fat, overstuffed, overblown, and all of this, when you've embraced most of it, which makes it that big?
How do you think that he...
20 years from now we'll be judged, the president.
Unless this deficit's fixed, I don't think very well.
Your feelings are toward him, presumably, I'm sure he's asking.
Well, I mean, you know, on the level of personality, he's one of the greatest personalities of all time to sit in an Oval Office.
You couldn't ask for someone who had a better temperament in terms of bearing up under the pressures and temptations of the highest office in the land.
I think the great failure is that his policies turned out pretty rotten.
Well, does he have a simplistic view of life, do you think?
He has an altimistic view.
I love that little story that he loves to tell about the update.
Yeah, the two ponies.
He has a filtering device that allows him to filter out all the information except that which is most palatable.
That which he likes, he remembers in great quantities.
The problem is most of that isn't relevant.
Does he surround himself with people who share the same view of life, the same grasp on them?
Well, he surrounds himself with retainers.
I mean, I don't think Edmise has been a great optimist.
Basically, Edmise is never going to buy the presents.
I don't think Deaver was an optimist or a pessimist.
He was just coming there to do what the president wanted.
Well, you know, the stakes are too great.
The issues are too complicated.
It's tough to have a bunch of yes-men around.
Yourself, an optimist or a pessimist?
Well, I used to be an optimist.
I think I've turned into a pessimist.
We've already been 20 minutes.
I guess we asked about your legacy, and I guess, do you have a legacy?
I mean, is the triple deficit triple whatever?
Well, look, I don't think I produced a triple deficit.
You provided the concrete program, you said.
I sort of pushed the button, started the system, put the system in motion.
Do you regret this?
Yeah, I do, and I say that in the book.
It was a mistake to push the button.
to remake the world in a short period of time, because it's hard for this cacophonous democracy and process we have in Washington to keep its collective mind focused on anything.
And so therefore, the bigger enterprise you unleash, the more likely an accident's going to happen.
My whole theory is that a giant accident occurred in 1981.
as a result of the system just getting wound up too tight, and being too frenetically engaged in policy action to keep track of what it was doing.
Of what it was doing.
Keep track of what it was doing.
Let's cover two more things so you can make your plan a little bit quickly.
I do want to just go over very briefly briefly the Atlantic thing, because I was fascinated by that.
Now, clearly you were embarrassed by Hicks when I guess you were embarrassed.
I guess, but weren't they taped?
Yeah, he was taping the whole thing.
Yeah, but it went on so long that I lost track of the rules that we set at the beginning, and we never did firm them up.
And did you know you were working on a story?
Let's put it that way.
Sure.
Yeah, I knew he was going to write a story, and there was nothing wrong with that story, frankly, except two or three quotes.
One was the Trojan horse.
That was a metaphor that I always used.
I over-killed it, over-used it.
But you go back to my record, and Allman even points out in his books back when he was always using Trojan horse.
I kind of liked it.
It was a way of saying, it's not what it appears to be.
It looks like this, but there's something inside.
So that metaphor sounded like I thought Kemp Ross was a scam.
That wasn't it at all.
I said that Kemp Ross was a good idea, but inside it was an even better idea, dropping the top rate from 70 to 50.
But you know, that got twisted by the press so badly, I lost all faith in the American press when they couldn't even handle
that metaphor in the clear context in which it was true.
Oh, you know how the American press is.
Yeah, well, you know, they deal with newsbikes, right?
With a lead.
Yeah, and somebody else wrote the lead.
It wasn't married by the story, including their all-flapping and jaws and their feet in it.
And now you have to run with them, too.
I mean, two nights running, as you say.
Yeah.
Now, the other one that I used was, nobody understood what was going on with these numbers.
for anybody, mildly conversant with the budget, whether a journalist, a senator, or someone who's spent a little time in budget time in the executive office knows that that is just a prosaic statement of frustration about the fact that in this trillion-dollar budget with the economy constantly changing, these numbers are always moving around as frustrating.
But they took that one as if it were some confession
That's good.
I just want to ask you one other thing.
The timing of the book, commerce certainly has something to do with it.
It's not a sour grapes book so much as it is perhaps that you're taking advantage of a bullish marketplace right now.
I mean this book is more saleable, perhaps because it's not written now, than it might be five years from now.
That's fine.
Does this have something to do with its being published now as opposed to after the administration?
No, not at all.
When I left in August, I said project number one was sit down and write the story.
I then put it on the market, and the market did whatever it did.
Whatever it did.
My plan from beginning to end was spend the next four or five months writing the story, what happened, what was fresh in my mind.
I had all the documents.
And the economic value in the marketplace had nothing to do with it.
It's fortuitous that it is what it is, let's put it that way.
But you acknowledge that it certainly has more currency now than it might have.
Well, that makes the book have more currency.
Sure.
It makes the book have more currency, but I would have written it anyway.
I hope you don't mind using that.
Is it data currency?
great it's not my fault trust me another an hour we have a half a piece we have a pretty good